# Udacity Data Engineering Nanodegree Program
## Project 4: Data Lakes with Spark

### Project Summary
This project, as part of the Udacity Data Engineering Nanodegree, focusses on Spark and Data Lakes.

## IMPORTANT NOTE:
It is important to stress that credentials / AWS access keys in `dl.cfg` are NEVER shared or saved when publishing / committing this file.

### Background
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As part of this nanodegree, the task at hand is building an ETL pipeline that extracts the data from S3, processes it using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

### Datasets
#### Song dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

> song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
> song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

> {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

#### Log dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

> log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
> log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json


### Files
In addition to the data files, this projects contains 3 files:

- `dl.cfg`: contains AWS credentials
- `etl.py`: reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3
- `README.md` (this file)

### Database Schema and justification
The tables that are created to wrote the data back to S3 have the following lay out:
- songplays - records in log data associated with song plays
`songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent`

- users - users in the app
`user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level`
- songs - songs in music database
`song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration`
- artists - artists in music database
`artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude`
- time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
`start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday`

### Extract, transform, load (ETL)
As stated above, `etl.py` reads and processes the files from song_data and log_data and writes the output as parquet files back to S3

### Running the scripts
To run the ETL proces, run:
> python etl.py

##### NOTE: for this to work, `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` have to be created through AWS and saved in `dl.cfg`. See above.

### Testing
After running `etl.py`, the parquet files can be found in the `output_data` path specified in the script (which in this case is an S3 bucket).
